Spontaneous solutions
自发的解决方案

Working with Günter Wagner from Yale University and others, Watson built a model network in which genes can either increase or reduce each other’s activity, as they do in nature. Each network configuration controls how the genes within it interact to give rise to a different phenotype, presented in the form of a pixelated image on a screen. The modellers evolved the network by randomly changing the gene connections, one mutation at a time, and selecting those networks that produced an image with a closer resemblance to one deemed to be the optimal phenotype – a picture of Darwin’s face. Thus guided, the evolving system eventually reproduced this image, at which point the team used the same process to teach it to reproduce Hebb’s face.

与耶鲁大学的金特·瓦格纳（Günter Wagner）一起， 沃森制作了一个基因网络模型，基因可以在其中增强或削弱自身和其他基因的活跃度，就像自然过程中的那样。每个网络的结构控制基因如何相互作用，并由此产生一种不同的表现型。不同的表现型会在屏幕上以马赛克图像的方式表现出来。研究人员通过随机改变基因网络的连接，一次一个突变来让基因网络得到进化。和目标——一张达尔文人像——更接近的基因网络在每一代被作为优胜者挑选出来。如此下去，这个网络模型能够重现达尔文的脸。然后用同样的步骤继续训练这个模型，海布（上文中的Donald Hebb，提出了Hebbian learning）的脸也能够被重现。

But here came the surprise. The modellers then removed the selection pressure guiding the system towards mugshots of Darwin or Hebb. Any old mutation that arose was allowed to survive. But the system did not produce a random image, or a Darwin-Hebb mash-up. Instead, it produced one or the other face – and as little as a single gene mutation was enough to trigger a flip between the two. In other words, a model that simply took account of genes’ networked nature showed that when the genotype had learned solutions, it could remember them and reproduce them in different environments – as indeed our brains can.

接下来到了见证奇迹的时刻。研究人员取消了每一步的选择压力，所有的突变都能存活（译者注：即便产生的图像不像达尔文或者海布也不会被淘汰）。但这个模型系统并没有产生随机的杂乱无章的图片，也没有产生混合达尔文和海布特征的图片。与之相反的，这个模型只会产生达尔文或海布的脸。仅仅一个连接突变就能够让模型从产生达尔文的脸转变成产生海布的脸。换句话说，这个只基于网络结构的模型能够记住“习得”的解决方案，并能够在不同的环境下进行重现。（译者：就是说这个模型在不改变基因的情况下，仅仅通过改变基因之间是如何连接的，就能够产生不同的表现型。）

Evidence for learning in this sense is often seen in the natural world, for instance in the way a crocodile genome can produce a male or female crocodile depending on the temperature at which the egg is incubated. But learning the way our brains do it is not just about remembering and reproducing past solutions. “A real learning system also has to be able to generalise – to produce good solutions even in new situations it hasn’t encountered before,” says Watson. Think crossing a road you’ve never crossed before versus crossing a familiar one.

这种网络学习的证据在自然界中也广泛存在。比如鳄鱼的基因可以根据孵化温度决定出生的小鳄鱼的性别。但我们大脑的学习方式并不仅仅是记住并重复以往的解决问题的方法。“一个真正的学习系统要能够进行举一反三，即遇到过去从未出现的问题也能有好的办法解决，”沃森说。就像穿过一条熟悉的马路和穿过一条以前没有走过的马路。

This generalisation ability rests in recognising similarities between new and old problems, so as to combine the building blocks of past solutions to tackle the problem at hand. And as another model created by Watson and his colleagues showed last year, this kind of learning is also what a gene network does under the pressure of natural selection. The cost associated with making gene connections – proteins must be produced and energy expended – favours networks with fewer connections. Subsets of connections that work well together become bound tightly in blocks that themselves are only loosely associated. Just as our brains do, natural selection memorises partial solutions – and these building blocks are embedded in the structure of the gene network (arxiv.org/abs/1508.06854).

这种举一反三的能力取决于认识到旧的问题和新的问题之间的相似之处，并且能够把以往问题的解决方案中的模块重新组合以解决新的问题。沃森和他的同事去年创建了一个新的模型表明，这也正是基因网络在自然选择压力下的学习方式。因为让不同的基因之间能够产生联系需要生成蛋白质并消耗能量，所以连线比较稀疏的网络更有优势。能够产生协同作用的基因之间会形成一个连接紧密的子网络，这些子网络模块之间形成稀疏相连，形成一个大的基因网络。和我们大脑一样，自然选择会记住这些部分解决方案（子网络模块），并把它们嵌入到基因网络中。（译者：可以把有待解决的大的问题拆分成一个个更小的问题去解决。一个连接紧密的子网络（模块）可以看作是某一个小问题的解决方案。把所有的小的解决方案组合起来，就是大问题的解决方案。在进化中，有些用来解决以往问题的子网络模块可以被重新组合，去解决新的问题。）

This way of working allows genotypes to generate phenotypes that are both complex and flexible. “If past selection has shaped the building blocks well, it can make solving new problems look easy,” says Watson. Instead of merely making limbs longer or shorter, for example, evolution can change whether forelimbs and hindlimbs evolve independently or together. A single mutation that changes connections in the network can lengthen all four legs of a giraffe, or allow a bat to increase its wingspan without getting too leggy. And a feather or an eye needn’t be generated from scratch, but can evolve by mixing and matching building blocks that have served well in the past (see diagram).

这种办法使得基因能够生成复杂而又灵活的性状（表现型）。沃森说：“如果过去的自然选择把子模块打磨的很好，那么用它们来解决新的问题会变得很容易。”进化不仅能让肢体变长或变短，它还能决定前肢和后腿是否同时进化或独立进化。一个（基因网络）连接的突变能让长颈鹿的四条腿一起变长，也能让蝙蝠的翼展变宽的同时不改变其双腿的长度。类似的，羽毛或眼睛并不是从零开始打造的，而是进化过程中把一堆过去形成的好用的子模块进行混合匹配的结果。

This ability to learn needs no supernatural intervention – it is an inevitable product of random variation and selection acting on gene networks. “Far from being blind or dumb, evolution is very smart,” says Watson.

这种学习能力并不需要超自然的干预，这只是作用在基因网络上的随机突变和自然选择的必然结果。沃森说：“（进化）一不瞎，二不傻，它是非常聪明的。”（理查德·道金斯（Richard Dawkins，牛津大学教授，《自私的基因》作者）有一本书叫《盲人钟表匠》，形容进化选择像一个盲人但塑造出了很精密的生物。沃森这里的瞎和傻应该是指此前进化生物学的一些观点对进化的描述。译者注。）

Watson’s idea has caught the attention of respected evolutionary theorists, among them Eörs Szathmáry of the Parmenides Foundation in Munich, Germany. “It is absolutely new,” he says. “I thought that the idea was so fascinating and so interesting that I should put some support behind it.” Earlier this year, he and Watson collaborated on a paper called “How Can Evolution Learn?” to discuss some of its implications (Trends in Ecology and Evolution, vol 31, p 146).

沃森的观点得到了一些著名进化论学者的关注，其中包括位于德国慕尼黑的巴门尼德基金会（Parmenides Foundation）的埃洛斯·萨斯玛利（Eörs Szathmáry，合著有《The Major Transitions in Evolution》）。萨斯玛利说：“这是全新的（观点），我认为这个观点是如此有趣和令人着迷，我应该对其予以支持。”。萨斯玛利和沃森合著了一篇名为《进化是怎样进行学习的》（《How Can Evolution Learn?》，Trends in Ecology and Evolution, vol 31, p 146）的文章，在其中探讨了这个观点的意义和启发。

For a start, if evolution learns, by definition it must get better at what it does. It will not only evolve new adaptations, but improve its ability to do so. This notion, known as the evolution of evolvability, has been around for some time, but is contentious because it seems to require forethought. No longer. “If you can do learning, then you are able to generalise from past experience and generate potentially useful and novel combinations,” says Szathmáry. “Then you can get evolvability.”

首先，如果进化过程能够进行学习，那么就意味着它对在做的事能变得更加得心应手。它不仅仅会进化出新的适应型，而且也会更善于进行这种进化。这个想法以前就被提出来过，被称为可演化性的进化（evolution of evolvability），但一直存在争议，因为貌似这样做需要未卜先知。如今事情有了转机，“如果你能够进行学习，那么你就能够对过去的经验进行归纳总结，并产生潜在有用的新的（模块）组合。”萨斯玛利说。（译者：我想这里的意思是经过进化选择得到的基因网络的连接结构能够更善于生成有用的新的性状。和传统进化论突变是完全随机的的观点形成对比。）

Applying similar ideas might also begin to explain how ecosystems evolve (see “Eco-learning“). More speculatively, Watson and Szathmáry suggest that the marriage between learning theory and evolutionary theory could throw light on the giant leaps made by evolution in the past 3.8 billion years. These “major transitions”, an idea first formulated by Szathmáry and John Maynard Smith in the 1990s, include the jumps from replicating molecules to cellular organisms, from single-celled to multicellular organisms and from asexual to sexual reproduction. Szathmáry and Watson think the key might lie in a model known as deep learning.

也许生态系统的演化也能用类似的想法解释（见文末：生态学习）。沃森和萨斯玛利更进一步进行推测，进化理论和学习理论的结合没准可以揭示过去38亿年来多次发生的进化的大跃进。萨斯玛利和约翰·梅纳德·史密斯（John Maynard Smith，《The Major Transitions in Evolution》的另一位合著者）于90年代提出的这些“主要的（进化）过渡事件（Major Transitions）”就包含从能够进行复制的分子到细胞生物体，从单细胞生物岛多细胞生物，从无性生殖到有性生殖的跃进。沃森和萨斯玛利认为（促成这些过渡的）关键和深度学习的模型存在共性。

This was how Google DeepMind beat the world’s top player at the ancient and fiendish game of Go earlier this month. It is based on Hebbian learning, with the difference that it “freezes” successive levels of a network once it has learned as much as it can, using the information acquired as the starting point for the next level. “It’s intriguing that evolutionary algorithms exploiting deep learning can solve problems that single-level evolution cannot,” says Watson – although he admits the details of the parallel are still to be worked out. If we could tease out the circumstances required to produce a major transition, that might suggest where evolution is heading next – or even how to engineer a transition. For example, says Watson, it might show us how to transform a community of microbes into a true multicellular organism.

谷歌的DeepMind实验室的产品正是靠深度学习模型击败围棋世界冠军的。这个模型基于海布学习（Hebbian learning），不同之处在于当一个网络已经充分学习，它能够“冻结”当前的级别，并以此作为起点向下一个级别进发。沃森说：“进化的算法能够利用深度学习（机制）解决单次进化无法解决的问题，这非常奇妙。”尽管他承认进化和深度学习之间的类比还需要进一步的工作来阐明。如果我们能够找出能促成主要（进化）过渡事件（Major Transitions）的外界因素，则可能知道下一步进化的方向，甚至能人为制造出一个进化过渡。比如这可能教我们如何把一个微生物群落变成一个真正的多细胞生物体。

Other evolution researchers are also intrigued. “Watson and Szathmáry are right in recognising that a species’ evolutionary history structures its genes in much the same way that an individual’s learning history structures its mind,” says Mark Pagel of the University of Reading, UK. David Sloan Wilson at Binghamton University, New York, thinks it could be an important step forward too. “In the past, it has been heretical to think about evolution as a forward-looking process, but the analogy with learning – itself a product of evolution – is quite plausible,” he says.

其他的进化学者对此也很感兴趣。“沃森和萨斯玛利正确的认识到一个物种的进化历程塑造它的基因的过程和一个人的学习历程塑造他的意识的过程是异曲同工的。”英国雷丁大学（University of Reading）的马克·帕格尔（Mark Pagel）说。纽约州宾厄姆顿大学（Binghamton University）的大卫·斯隆·威尔逊（David Sloan Wilson）同样认为这是很重要的进展。他说：“在过去，认为进化过程是有先见之明的想法是异端邪说。但和学习过程的类比这个想法站得住脚。学习过程本身也是进化的产物。”

Szathmáry thinks we can fruitfully see that analogy from both ends. If evolution and cognitive learning are based on the same principles, we can use our understanding of either to throw new light on the other. With that in mind, he is now co-opting evolutionary theory to investigate the long-standing puzzle of how infants learn language so easily with no formal teaching and little other input.

萨斯玛利认为这类比中的两者是相辅相成的。如果进化和认知学习基于同样的原则，我们就能把对这两个领域的成果进行相互借鉴。正是抱这这样的想法，他正在以进化理论为指导来研究一个长久以来的困惑：为何新生儿没有受正规指导但能很容易地学会说话。

Those infants may now grow up with a better grasp on the processes underlying that greatest of theories, evolution by natural selection. If evolution looks smart, that’s because it is, says Watson. “The observation that evolutionary adaptations look like the product of intelligence isn’t evidence against Darwinian evolution – it’s exactly what you should expect.”

如今这些婴儿成长过程也许更加离不开自然选择进化的伟大理论。如果进化看上去很明智，那是因为它就是很明智，沃森说。“进化产生的适应性看上去像智能设计的观点并不是反对达尔文进化论的证据。相反，这正是符合（进化论）预期的。”

[[Quora] Humans make use of probabilistic methods all of the time, it’s just that we don’t really consider it. What we do have isn’t so much a superior reasoning ability but a reasoning ability that is optimized for our environment- which means the ability to understand language (hugely important and difficult), and ability to understand the world around us (even during the earliest stages of our development we have certain models of the world built in- an understanding of 3 dimensional space, for instance, and how to navigate through it in a somewhat optimal manner). http://qr.ae/TU1BjP]

Eco-learning
生态学习
How does a forest develop the ability to share limited resources such as light and water? It’s a puzzle how such seemingly harmonious environments develop from a collection of individuals of different species. “There’s currently no general theory of how ecosystems evolve,” says Richard Watson at the University of Southampton, UK.

一片森林是如何掌握共享有限的资源（如水和光照）的能力的呢？这些不同物种的个体是如何发展成和谐共处的自然环境是个迷。“目前没有关于生态系统是如何演化的的一般理论。”南安普敦大学的理查德·沃森（Richard Watson）说。

By thinking about the genes within organisms as networks, Watson has shown that evolution can learn from the past to solve new problems of survival (see main story). But the same might apply to ecological networks, he thinks.

通过把生物体内的基因看成网络结构，沃森表明进化能够通过对过去的学习来解决新的生存挑战。他认为生态网络中也可能存在类似的机制。

There is a big difference: ecosystems must “learn” unaided by natural selection because it only favours fit individuals, not fit communities. Computer scientists have a way to model such “unsupervised” learning. Instead of guiding an evolving network towards a solution to a given problem, they use a rule that reinforces already common correlations. Such algorithms are known to efficiently discover categories, clusters and regularities in data sets. Working with his Southampton colleague Daniel Power and others, Watson has used them to model learning in the evolution of an ecological network (Biology Direct, vol 10, p 69).

其中有一个很大的区别在于：生态系统的“学习”必须不依仗自然选择。因为自然选择只青睐适应的个体，而不是适应的群体。计算机科学家有一种能模拟这种“无监督”学习的模型。和去引导一个演化中的网络去解决一个既定问题（监督学习，译者注。）不同，他们使用一种方法来增强已经普遍存在的关联。这类算法能够有效地发掘数据中的类别，团簇和规律。通过和南安普顿的同事丹尼尔·鲍尔（Daniel Power）等人的合作，沃森用这类算法来模拟生态网络在演化中是如何学习的。

Remarkably, ecosystem networks allowed to evolve in this way retain collective memories – information about ecological interactions that have produced successful structures and behaviours in the past. This could explain why a damaged coral reef can revert to its former composition if left to recover, or why a rainforest can recover from fragmentation.

令人惊奇的是，生态系统网络是可以通过这种方法演化来保有共同记忆的。这些集体记忆是指关于以往能够产生的成功的结构和行为的生态互动的信息。这可以解释珊瑚礁受损后为何能自我修复到之前的品类成分。或者为何支离破碎的雨林能够恢复如初。

It also suggests that if an ecosystem faces a challenge it has encountered in the past, it may be more able to recover than in the face of a new challenge. In theory, an ecosystem’s collective memory could be extremely long, because of being etched into the genomes of the organisms that comprise it. An ecosystem that has experienced warming in the past, for example, might be better equipped to cope with global warming now.

依此也可以推出，和面对新的挑战相比，一个生态系统面临过去经受过的考验时，也许更容易复原（哼哼，同样的招数对圣斗士只能用一次。译者吐槽。）。理论上，一个生态系统的集体记忆能够保持非常久，因为这已经镌刻在每个组成部分的生物体的基因里了。比方说，一个过去经历过变暖的生态系统，也许能更好的应对如今的全球变暖。

